<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter NUMBER</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-1" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-1-17" epub:type="chapter">
    			<h3>Chapter 17</h3>

<p>In connection with the automobile ride suggested and arranged
for the following Sunday by Hegglund through his chauffeur friend,
a change of plan was announced. The car—an expensive Packard,
no less—could not be had for that day, but must be used by
this Thursday or Friday, or not at all. For, as had been previously
explained to all, but not with the strictest adherence to the
truth, the car belonged to a certain Mr. Kimbark, an elderly and
very wealthy man who at the time was traveling in Asia. Also, what
was not true was that this particular youth was not Mr. Kimbark's
chauffeur at all, but rather the rakish, ne'er-do-well son of
Sparser, the superintendent of one of Mr. Kimbark's stock farms.
This son being anxious to pose as something more than the son of a
superintendent of a farm, and as an occasional watchman, having
access to the cars, had decided to take the very finest of them and
ride in it.</p>

<p>It was Hegglund who proposed that he and his hotel friends be
included on some interesting trip. But since the general invitation
had been given, word had come that within the next few weeks Mr.
Kimbark was likely to return. And because of this, Willard Sparser
had decided at once that it might be best not to use the car any
more. He might be taken unawares, perhaps, by Mr. Kimbark's
unexpected arrival. Laying this difficulty before Hegglund, who was
eager for the trip, the latter had scouted the idea. Why not use it
once more anyhow? He had stirred up the interest of all of his
friends in this and now hated to disappoint them. The following
Friday, between noon and six o'clock, was fixed upon as the day.
And since Hortense had changed in her plans she now decided to
accompany Clyde, who had been invited, of course.</p>

<p>But as Hegglund had explained to Ratterer and Higby since it was
being used without the owner's consent, they must meet rather far
out—the men in one of the quiet streets near Seventeenth and
West Prospect, from which point they could proceed to a meeting
place more convenient for the girls, namely, Twentieth and
Washington. From thence they would speed via the west Parkway and
the Hannibal Bridge north and east to Harlem, North Kansas City,
Minaville and so through Liberty and Moseby to Excelsior Springs.
Their chief objective there was a little inn—the
Wigwam—a mile or two this side of Excelsior which was open
the year around. It was really a combination of restaurant and
dancing parlor and hotel. A Victrola and Wurlitzer player-piano
furnished the necessary music. Such groups as this were not
infrequent, and Hegglund as well as Higby, who had been there on
several occasions, described it as dandy. The food was good and the
road to it excellent. There was a little river just below it where
in the summer time at least there was rowing and fishing. In winter
some people skated when there was ice. To be sure, at this
time—January—the road was heavily packed with snow, but
easy to get over, and the scenery fine. There was a little lake,
not so far from Excelsior, at this time of year also frozen over,
and according to Hegglund, who was always unduly imaginative and
high-spirited, they might go there and skate.</p>

<p>"Will you listen to who's talkin' about skatin' on a trip like
this?" commented Ratterer, rather cynically, for to his way of
thinking this was no occasion for any such side athletics, but for
love-making exclusively.</p>

<p>"Aw, hell, can't a fellow have a funny idea even widout bein'
roasted for it?" retorted the author of the idea.</p>

<p>The only one, apart from Sparser, who suffered any qualms in
connection with all this was Clyde himself. For to him, from the
first, the fact that the car to be used did not belong to Sparser,
but to his employer, was disturbing, almost irritatingly so. He did
not like the idea of taking anything that belonged to any one else,
even for temporary use. Something might happen. They might be found
out.</p>

<p>"Don't you think it's dangerous for us to be going out in this
car?" he asked of Ratterer a few days before the trip and when he
fully understood the nature of the source of the car.</p>

<p>"Oh, I don't know," replied Ratterer, who being accustomed to
such ideas and devices as this was not much disturbed by them. "I'm
not taking the car and you're not, are you? If he wants to take it,
that's his lookout, ain't it? If he wants me to go, I'll go. Why
wouldn't I? All I want is to be brought back here on time. That's
the only thing that would ever worry me."</p>

<p>And Higby, coming up at the moment, had voiced exactly the same
sentiments. Yet Clyde remained troubled. It might not work out
right; he might lose his job through a thing like this. But so
fascinated was he by the thought of riding in such a fine car with
Hortense and with all these other girls and boys that he could not
resist the temptation to go.</p>

<p>Immediately after noon on the Friday of this particular week the
several participants of the outing were gathered at the points
agreed upon. Hegglund, Ratterer, Higby and Clyde at Eighteenth and
West Prospect near the railroad yards. Maida Axelrod, Hegglund's
girl, Lucille Nickolas, a friend of Ratterer's, and Tina Kogel, a
friend of Higby's, also Laura Sipe, another girl who was brought by
Tina Kogel to be introduced to Sparser for the occasion, at
Twentieth and Washington. Only since Hortense had sent word at the
last moment to Clyde that she had to go out to her house for
something, and that they were to run out to Forty-ninth and
Genesee, where she lived, they did so, but not without
grumbling.</p>

<p>The day, a late January one, was inclined to be smoky with
lowering clouds, especially within the environs of Kansas City. It
even threatened snow at times—a most interesting and
picturesque prospect to those within. They liked it.</p>

<p>"Oh, gee, I hope it does," Tina Kogel exclaimed when some one
commented on the possibility, and Lucille Nickolas added: "Oh, I
just love to see it snow at times." Along the West Bluff Road,
Washington and Second Streets, they finally made their way across
the Hannibal Bridge to Harlem, and from thence along the winding
and hill-sentineled river road to Randolph Heights and Minaville.
And beyond that came Moseby and Liberty, to and through which the
road bed was better, with interesting glimpses of small homesteads
and the bleak snow-covered hills of January.</p>

<p>Clyde, who for all his years in Kansas City had never ventured
much beyond Kansas City, Kansas, on the west or the primitive and
natural woods of Swope Park on the east, nor farther along the
Kansas or Missouri Rivers than Argentine on the one side and
Randolph Heights on the other, was quite fascinated by the idea of
travel which appeared to be suggested by all this—distant
travel. It was all so different from his ordinary routine. And on
this occasion Hortense was inclined to be very genial and friendly.
She snuggled down beside him on the seat, and when he, noting that
the others had already drawn their girls to them in affectionate
embraces, put his arm about her and drew her to him, she made no
particular protest. Instead she looked up and said: "I'll have to
take my hat off, I guess." The others laughed. There was something
about her quick, crisp way which was amusing at times. Besides she
had done her hair in a new way which made her look decidedly
prettier, and she was anxious to have the others see it.</p>

<p>"Can we dance anywhere out here?" she called to the others,
without looking around.</p>

<p>"Surest thing you know," said Higby, who by now had persuaded
Tina Kogel to take her hat off and was holding her close. "They got
a player-piano and a Victrola out there. If I'd 'a' thought, I'd
'a' brought my cornet. I can play Dixie on that."</p>

<p>The car was speeding at breakneck pace over a snowy white road
and between white fields. In fact, Sparser, considering himself a
master of car manipulation as well as the real owner of it for the
moment, was attempting to see how fast he could go on such a
road.</p>

<p>Dark vignettes of wood went by to right and left. Fields away,
sentinel hills rose and fell like waves. A wide-armed scarecrow
fluttering in the wind, its tall decayed hat awry, stood near at
hand in one place. And from near it a flock of crows rose and
winged direct toward a distant wood lightly penciled against a
foreground of snow.</p>

<p>In the front seat sat Sparser, guiding the car beside Laura Sipe
with the air of one to whom such a magnificent car was a
commonplace thing. He was really more interested in Hortense, yet
felt it incumbent on him, for the time being, anyhow, to show some
attention to Laura Sipe. And not to be outdone in gallantry by the
others, he now put one arm about Laura Sipe while he guided the car
with the other, a feat which troubled Clyde, who was still dubious
about the wisdom of taking the car at all. They might all be
wrecked by such fast driving. Hortense was only interested by the
fact that Sparser had obviously manifested his interest in her;
that he had to pay some attention to Laura Sipe whether he wanted
to or not. And when she saw him pull her to him and asked her
grandly if she had done much automobiling about Kansas City, she
merely smiled to herself.</p>

<p>But Ratterer, noting the move, nudged Lucille Nickolas, and she
in turn nudged Higby, in order to attract his attention to the
affectional development ahead.</p>

<p>"Getting comfortable up front there, Willard?" called Ratterer,
genially, in order to make friends with him.</p>

<p>"I'll say I am," replied Sparser, gayly and without turning.
"How about you, girlie?"</p>

<p>"Oh, I'm all right," Laura Sipe replied.</p>

<p>But Clyde was thinking that of all the girls present none was
really so pretty as Hortense—not nearly. She had come garbed
in a red and black dress with a very dark red poke bonnet to match.
And on her left cheek, just below her small rouged mouth, she had
pasted a minute square of black court plaster in imitation of some
picture beauty she had seen. In fact, before the outing began, she
had been determined to outshine all the others present, and
distinctly she was now feeling that she was succeeding. And Clyde,
for himself, was agreeing with her.</p>

<p>"You're the cutest thing here," whispered Clyde, hugging her
fondly.</p>

<p>"Gee, but you can pour on the molasses, kid, when you want to,"
she called out loud, and the others laughed. And Clyde flushed
slightly.</p>

<p>Beyond Minaville about six miles the car came to a bend in a
hollow where there was a country store and here Hegglund, Higby and
Ratterer got out to fetch candy, cigarettes and ice cream cones and
ginger ale. And after that came Liberty, and then several miles
this side of Excelsior Springs, they sighted the Wigwam which was
nothing more than an old two-story farmhouse snuggled against a
rise of ground behind it. There was, however, adjoining it on one
side a newer and larger one-story addition consisting of the
dining-room, the dance floor, and concealed by a partition at one
end, a bar. An open fire flickered cheerfully here in a large
fireplace. Down in a hollow across the road might be seen the
Benton River or creek, now frozen solid.</p>

<p>"There's your river," called Higby cheerfully as he helped Tina
Kogel out of the car, for he was already very much warmed by
several drinks he had taken en route. They all paused for a moment
to admire the stream, winding away among the trees. "I wanted dis
bunch to bring dere skates and go down dere," sighed Hegglund, "but
dey wouldn't. Well, dat's all right."</p>

<p>By then Lucille Nickolas, seeing a flicker of flame reflected in
one of the small windows of the inn, called, "Oh, see, they gotta
fire."</p>

<p>The car was parked, and they all trooped into the inn, and at
once Higby briskly went over and started the large, noisy,
clattery, tinny Nickelodeon with a nickel. And to rival him, and
for a prank, Hegglund ran to the Victrola which stood in one corner
and put on a record of "The Grizzly Bear," which he found lying
there.</p>

<p>At the first sounds of this strain, which they all knew, Tina
Kogel called: "Oh, let's all dance to that, will you? Can't you
stop that other old thing?" she added.</p>

<p>"Sure, after it runs down," explained Ratterer, laughingly. "The
only way to stop that thing is not to feed it any nickels."</p>

<p>But now a waiter coming in, Higby began to inquire what
everybody wanted. And in the meantime, to show off her charms,
Hortense had taken the center of the floor and was attempting to
imitate a grizzly bear walking on its hind legs, which she could do
amusingly enough—quite gracefully. And Sparser, seeing her
alone in the center of the floor was anxious to interest her now,
followed her and tried to imitate her motions from behind. Finding
him clever at it, and anxious to dance, she finally abandoned the
imitation and giving him her arms went one-stepping about the room
most vividly. At once, Clyde, who was by no means as good a dancer,
became jealous—painfully so. In his eagerness for her, it
seemed unfair to him that he should be deserted by her so
early—at the very beginning of things. But she, becoming
interested in Sparser, who seemed more worldly-wise, paid no
attention at all to Clyde for the time being, but went dancing with
her new conquest, his rhythmic skill seeming charmingly to match
her own. And then, not to be out of it, the others at once chose
partners, Hegglund dancing with Maida, Ratterer with Lucille and
Higby with Tina Kogel. This left Laura Sipe for Clyde, who did not
like her very much. She was not as perfect as she might be—a
plump, pudgy-faced girl with inadequate sensual blue eyes—and
Clyde, lacking any exceptional skill, they danced nothing but the
conventional one-step while the others were dipping and lurching
and spinning.</p>

<p>In a kind of sick fury, Clyde noticed that Sparser, who was
still with Hortense, was by now holding her close and looking
straight into her eyes. And she was permitting him. It gave him a
feeling of lead at the pit of his stomach. Was it possible she was
beginning to like this young upstart who had this car? And she had
promised to like him for the present. It brought to him a sense of
her fickleness—the probability of her real indifference to
him. He wanted to do something—stop dancing and get her away
from Sparser, but there was no use until this particular record ran
out.</p>

<p>And then, just at the end of this, the waiter returned with a
tray and put down cocktails, ginger ale and sandwiches upon three
small tables which had been joined together. All but Sparser and
Hortense quit and came toward it—a fact which Clyde was quick
to note. She was a heartless flirt! She really did not care for him
after all. And after making him think that she did, so
recently— and getting him to help her with that coat. She
could go to the devil now. He would show her. And he waiting for
her! Wasn't that the limit? Yet, finally seeing that the others
were gathering about the tables, which had been placed near the
fire, Hortense and Sparser ceased dancing and approached. Clyde was
white and glum. He stood to one side, seemingly indifferent. And
Laura Sipe, who had already noted his rage and understood the
reason now moved away from him to join Tina Kogel, to whom she
explained why he was so angry.</p>

<p>And then noting his glumness, Hortense came over, executing a
phase of the "Grizzly" as she did so.</p>

<p>"Gee, wasn't that swell?" she began. "Gee, how I do love to
dance to music like that!"</p>

<p>"Sure, it's swell for you," returned Clyde, burning with envy
and disappointment.</p>

<p>"Why, what's the trouble?" she asked, in a low and almost
injured tone, pretending not to guess, yet knowing quite well why
he was angry. "You don't mean to say that you're mad because I
danced with him first, do you? Oh, how silly! Why didn't you come
over then and dance with me? I couldn't refuse to dance with him
when he was right there, could I?"</p>

<p>"Oh, no, of course, you couldn't," replied Clyde sarcastically,
and in a low, tense tone, for he, no more than Hortense, wanted the
others to hear. "But you didn't have to fall all over him and dream
in his eyes, either, did you?" He was fairly blazing. "You needn't
say you didn't, because I saw you."</p>

<p>At this she glanced at him oddly, realizing not only the
sharpness of his mood, but that this was the first time he had
shown so much daring in connection with her. It must be that he was
getting to feel too sure of her. She was showing him too much
attention. At the same time she realized that this was not the time
to show him that she did not care for him as much as she would like
to have him believe, since she wanted the coat, already agreed
upon.</p>

<p>"Oh, gee, well, ain't that the limit?" she replied angrily, yet
more because she was irritated by the fact that what he said was
true than anything else. "If you aren't the grouch. Well, I can't
help it, if you're going to be as jealous as that. I didn't do
anything but dance with him just a little. I didn't think you'd be
mad." She moved as if to turn away, but realizing that there was an
understanding between them, and that he must be placated if things
were to go on, she drew him by his coat lapels out of the range of
the hearing of the others, who were already looking and listening,
and began.</p>

<p>"Now, see here, you. Don't go acting like this. I didn't mean
anything by what I did. Honest, I didn't. Anyhow, everybody dances
like that now. And nobody means anything by it. Aren't you goin' to
let me be nice to you like I said, or are you?"</p>

<p>And now she looked him coaxingly and winsomely and calculatingly
straight in the eye, as though he were the one person among all
these present whom she really did like. And deliberately, and of a
purpose, she made a pursy, sensuous mouth—the kind she could
make— and practised a play of the lips that caused them to
seem to want to kiss him—a mouth that tempted him to
distraction.</p>

<p>"All right," he said, looking at her weakly and yieldingly. "I
suppose I am a fool, but I saw what you did, all right. You know
I'm crazy about you, Hortense—just wild! I can't help it. I
wish I could sometimes. I wish I wouldn't be such a fool." And he
looked at her and was sad. And she, realizing her power over him
and how easy it was to bring him around, replied: "Oh,
you—you don't, either. I'll kiss you after a while, when the
others aren't looking if you'll be good." At the same time she was
conscious of the fact that Sparser's eyes were upon her. Also that
he was intensely drawn to her and that she liked him more than any
one she had recently encountered.</p>


			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
